Jamestown Plus Critique

-- show montage of bullet dodging--

Well here we are. After five long years, Jamestown Plus finally makes its way
to PC.  Featuring four additional pilots, two brand new
levels, and the super gauntlet mode, there's plenty of extra content on
display here. Let's see how this version of the game holds up.

For those of you that are new to Bullet Hell shooters, here's a small
collection of gameplay to get you brought up to speed.  --Play DoDonpachi,
Deathsmiles, Mushihimesama, Blue Revolver--

While individual mechanics and aesthetics greatly differ, all
good shooters abide by two essential rules.

1). Visual Clarity. 

Can the player track what's occuring onscreen at any given moment?  Can they
distinguish what lies in the foreground versus what's in the background? Is it
easy to tell what is and is not an enemy?  Are projectiles distinct from all
other objects, so that they don't blend into their surroundings?

No matter how many bullets are flying across the screen, a well-designed shmup
should always be visually readable by the player. 


2). Precise Player Movement

Given that shooters can require pixel perfect timing to avoid attacks,
accurate player movement is necessary. In general, you should always be able to
predict where your ship will go at any given moment. So systems like
acceleration or ending inertia directly work against this principle.

Although there are issues with enemy and player bullets sometimes being hard to
distinguish, Jamestown otherwise meets these critical criteria, while adding in
some of its own interesting mechanics.

Let me briefly talk about the combat basics. Every ship has access to a primary
attack, a special, and the vaunt ability. Excluding the Armada
fleet, each pilot has a fixed firing pattern for their primary. Beam will
shotgun out a spread of projectiles, whereas Charge shoots out a more
concentrated pillar of them. A pilot's special is usually an alternate attack,
but they can also provide utility. For example, Ghost creates a doppelganger
that fires bullets, while Gunner can reposition his energy wave's firing angle.

When the player collects enough gold from enemies, they can trigger a vaunt. On
activation, a temporary shield is created around their ship, blocking any
incoming projectiles. Additionally, until Vaunt's duration runs out, you'll
gain a 2x score multiplier and deal 50% additional damage.  On top of that,
when Vaunt expires, you'll receive an additional score bonus based on how long
the ability was active. Finally, vaunt can be prematurely ended to create an
emergency projectile shield, at the cost of briefly preventing gold from
recharging vaunt.  

Mastering this ability is key to success in Jamestown. The utility of clearing
out bullets cannot be underestimated, as it can allow you to reposition
yourself into safety and save you from death. Alternatively, it allows
aggressive ships like Ghost and Bomber to get a few critical seconds of
invulnerability. On the whole, Vaunting grants the player several tactical
options available at any given moment. Do you let it quickly expire to spam the
defensive aspect of the ability, or do you draw out its duration to maximize
DPS and score?  Additionally, you'll need to decide when you want to
prematurely end a vaunt, as it can save you from fatal damage.  Overall, Vaunt
adds in a nice layer of strategic depth to the already chaotic battlefield,
while forcing the player to consider the metagame consequences of their
decisions. I think this is a much more interesting system than the
screen-clearing bombs seen in other shooters, because Vaunt has much more
nuance to it while still being simple to understand.


Where Jamestown also sets itself apart is with its insane ship variety. You can
choose between 12 unique pilots, 3 of which have customizable specials and
firing patterns.  While I appreciate all of this choice, I do think many
problems arise as a result. Let's examine each of these pilots in more depth to
see why. 

Beam is the first ship you'll have unlocked, being well balanced all-around,
but not excelling at anything. He's got a cone shaped spread of bullets, which
allows him to slightly juke enemies while still hitting them.  His special is a
massive laser beam that deals hefty damage, but slows him to a crawl during the
process. While this can be an annoyance, I do find that this speed penalty can
be situationally used for more precise movement. His major downside is that he
can be rather easily flanked by enemies, a problem common with many other
ships. I think of the "noob" pilots in the game (gunpowder, beam, charge, and
treason), I find Beam to be the most versatile , thanks in part to
his solid firing pattern and reliable damage output. 

Charge is good at killing bosses, but not much else. While her energy ball
deals a ridiculous amount of damage to anything it touches, it takes a while to
charge up and travels slowly. Furthermore, she has zero angled attacks, so
you'll always need to be in the direct line of fire to deal damage. The main
problem I have with her is that she needs to rely on the orbs to reliably clear
crowds. So if you whiff your special, that mistake can easily result in death.
I find that she's weakest on levels with tightly clustered enemies like
Badlands or Phobos, since she has no way to effectively deal with enemy flanks.
As a result, I'm not a huge fan of her playstyle.

If you're a masochist and hate your life, then Bomber is the perfect pilot for
you!  How his gimmick works is that he shoots out a slow stream of weak
bullets. At any point, he can detonate these projectiles before they collide by
using his special to create small but highly damaging explosions.  In theory,
this is a cool idea, and in practice if you're aggressive enough, you can deal
some outright obscene damage to bosses.  However, this gameplay loop has many
problems for me. Because his primary fire deals so little damage and has such a
small AoE, you need to use his explosions to deal any real damage. As a result,
you need to either be dangerously close to spam explosions, or split your
attention between dodging and detonating bombs, both of which can easily lead
to your death. Since his gimmick requires so much micromanagement to make him
halfway decent, his special feels a liability, a problem that none of the other
ships have.  Overall, he just feels punishing to play as. If his explosion and
projectile radii were larger, then that'd give you some more breathing room for
dodging or spamming explosions. But as it is, Bomber feels underpowered due to
his need to be suicidally close to enemies. 

On the opposite end of the spectrum we have Gunner, one of the most versatile
pilots in Jamestown. His special allows him to shift his energy waves based on
the direction he's currently moving in. This effectively allows him to have 360
degree bullet coverage, a trait that most other ships in the game lack.  As a
result, it's hard to be ganked, as he can reposition himself to easily clear
out groups of flanking foes. This is especially useful in bossfights, where he
can focus purely on dodging while still passively dealing damage. His biggest
setback is the rather narrow width of his energy waves, but I find his mobility
to more than make up for that.

Treason is unique in that he is the fastest pilot in the game. However, he's
got several limitations to counterbalance this. The most notable of these is a
fixed firing pattern in front of the ship, meaning that he's quite vulnerable
to flanks. While he has homing missles to help out, firing or charging them
will slow the ship down to a crawl. Additional, they can't be "dumb-fired" and
will seemingly always target the "closest" enemy, which can be unpredictable.
Given that his primary fire deals a rather mediocre damage, you need to use
these missles to clear out enemies at a reasonable rate. Much like Charge, he
struggles heavily against large crowds (Badlands is particularly painful),
though his speed lets him escape chases more easily than most other pilots. A
unique drawback to Treason is that his movement harder to control due to his
speed, which has caused me to get hit by bullet frenzies.

Gunpower can deal some solid burst damage due to his orbital TNT barrels.
However, when you fire one off using your special, your primary attack becomes
weaker with each explosive you shoot off. These barrels have a "sweet" spot
where they deal maximum damage, so you need always keep this in mind or else
you'll regularly whiffing crowds of enemies. I'm not a fan of this aspect of
his ship design, since I feel that it adds in pointless micromanagement, much
like Bomber's manually detonated explosives. Much like charge, Gunpowder's
biggest drawback is his inability to protect himself from a flank.

Ghost is one of the more unusual pilots in the game in that you're playing as
two ships simultaneously. On its own, his primary fire deals  rather negligible
damage.  However, this all changes when you use his special. Depending on where
you activate it, Ghost will create a astral projection that shoots streams of
bullets above and below it. Activating the special in another location will
cause the specter to move there after a short delay. Pressing it again will
recall the spirit. While this phantom is out, Ghost is restricted to using a
melee weapon. Unlike before, this modified primary fire deals incredible
damage, though it has a significantly shorter effective range.  I'd say of all
of the pilots in the game, he has one of the highest skill floors, as knowing
the exact spawn locations of enemies in each level is required to maximize his
effectiveness. Additionally, you need to be far more aggressive than most other
pilots, which increases the risk of getting hit. The upside to all of this is
that Ghost can clear through crowds and bosses rather quickly once mastered. 

The new Armada fleet operates differently in that you have the capabilities of
six pilots merged into three. Each ship can customize a loadout of two
different specials and six shared firing patterns. And truth be told, I'm not a
fan of this. While the concept of fine tuning a pilot to your individual tastes
is neat, I find that the modular loadouts makes these ships feel homogenous. I
would've rather had the Armada fleet split up into six individual pilots, so
that each ship has a distinct identity. Another problem I have with the Armada
pilots is how much stronger they are than their counterparts in the classic and
treason fleets.  

Drop is Beam 2.0. What makes him so much better than the OG is his ability to
"drop" beams into place when activated. These fire continuously until
cancelled, a bit similar to Ghost's projection wprls.  However, I find drop to
be superior to Ghost's summon, as the specter needs to be placed above incoming
enemies to be effective, which is difficult to perform in boss fights. Since
drop's laser fires directly above where you placed it, it's significantly
easier to reposition in the middle of a battle.  Secondly, unlike Beam, he's
not slowed down while his special is active.  penalty. 

Similarly, Espada also feels like an improved version of Ghost. While both
pilots have melee weapons, only Espada is able to reposition it, in a manner
similar to Gunner's 360 degree energy waves. Although Ghost has a source of
passive damage that Espada lacks, I find having supplementary primary fire to
be more useful than a specter, as the latter makes repositioning more
difficult.

Corazon is a better version of Charge.  For starters, Corazon has modular
firing patterns that can be used to fight off flanking enemies, something that
Charge is incapable of doing. Additionally, instead of shooting a slow-moving
orb in a straight line, Corazon's special is controllable crystal with a
massive hitbox. It's really no contest to which ship is betrer, as With one
activation of Corazon's special, you can clear out an entire screen of foes. 


The only ships that aren't made redundant by the new Armada pilots
are Gunner with his controllable energy waves and Treason with his improved
movement speed. 

Curiously, there's no practice mode to test drive pilots.  Considering that
you'll need to individually unlock most of your fleet, there's no way to try
out a ship and see if you like their playstyle before you purchase them in the
in-game shop . Such a mode would also allow you to get a basic grasp of pilot's
mechanics in a danger-free environment and quickly swap between ships for
practice. As it is, you'll have to load into a level and wait for the
unskippable text to clear before you can try them out, which is rather
annoying, especially with the Armada fleet's modular loadouts.

Let's conclude our discussion on Jamestown by talking about its level design. 
What makes for a good stage in a shmup? For me, it comes down to three things:


1). Avoiding Dead Time

Dead time is the cardinal sin of level pacing. The player should always be
making a meaningful decision, such as dodging bullets or clearing out priority
enemies.  So when nothing is happening on screen and there are no actions
to take, the level's momentum grinds to a complete halt. As a result, it's
important for shmups to minimize any and all wasted time. 

2). Flexibility

Is a stage designed in such a way such that it allows for multiple playstyles,
or are you shoehorned into a specific strategy? Can you aggressively rack up a
score combo, or do you play on the defensive to get a survival bonus? If it's
evident that a single "best" strategy exists, then there's little reason to try
out different tactics to maximize your score.

3). Variety

Simply put, repetition sucks. Both visually and mechanically, there needs to be
evolution to keep the player constantly engaged when replaying levels.  With
visuals, stages need to be distinct so that they don't blend into each other.
Otherwise, the game becomes a homogenous blur after a while. Mechanical variety
is especially important as the player's skill needs to be constantly tested in
new and interesting ways to keep them on their toes. Otherwise, levels become
forgettable, even if they have an awesome aesthetic.

So with those rules in mind, let's brielfy talk about each stage. 

East Frontier is the introductorylevel for Jamestown. As such, it give players
training wheels that aren't present on later stages, such as the British
musketeers that snipe foes. For the most part, enemy spawns on this level are
slow and predictable, giving players ample time to react and get familiar with
their pilot. The Traitor Prince boss fight is also fairly straightforward with
him only being a threat when he spawns in his tadpole army.  Overall, for a
tutorial level, it's not bad introductory level since it avoids lulls in
pacing, but it's still easily the most simplistic stage.

Dark Sector is the first level to introduce a miniboss, one that seemingly has
infinite fucking HP. Outside of that, you're introduced to yoming missles,
which require a bit more foresight to dodge.  Unlike East Frontier, the level's
identity completely shifts in the second half, switching to a dank swamp
covered with toxic plants. The Lady of the Lake is a pretty easy boss fight,
with only her ads being a real nuisance. So long as you take them out at a
reasonable rate, there's nothing to worry about.  Truth be told, Dark Sector is
my least favorite level. I find the miniboss to be more annoying than
challenging due to his inflated health pool, and there aren't many interesting
attack patterns with the enemies or the boss. That's a shame, because I love
the overall visual design, but mechanically, it falls short compared to the
later stages. 

Badlands is an immediate step up from Dark Sector. While it doesn't evolve
visually like the former does, I find it to be far more interesting
mechanically. Here, you're really tested on threat prioritization, as you'll
deal with homing UFOs, tripwire mines, and IEDs, all of which will fuck you up
in short order. The Last Sentry is also the most mechanically interesting boss
fight thus far, as each phase has uniquely placed weakspots that force you to
constantly reposition during the fight. That said, the spawning of his ads
seems to be glitched,as I've died after I've defeating him, as a mob spawned
directly on my ship, killing me instantly. But outside of that bug, it's a
solid stage, even if a bit forgettable visually.

New Madrid buiids upon the concepts introduced in Dark Sector, but with a
twist. This time around, target prioritization is crucial for achieving high
scores, as defeating the rail carts in the correct order is necessary for a
massive bonus. Outside of that, The Last Express boss introduces timed
weakpoints, forcing you to redo part of the phase if you're not quick enough in
killing him. Thankfully, the amount of progress you need to redo isn't enough
to be frustrating, so I think it adds in a nice incentive for speed. Overall,
New Madrid is an excellent continuation off of Badlands, as I love the new
mechanics introduced for high level scoring alongside the incredible visual
detail in the mine shafts. 

Croatoa is the final level of the base game, and easily the most interesting
from a mechanics standpoint.  Unlike the other stages, you need to physically
navigate around obstacles in order to proceed. In a way, it reminds me of a
platformer and adds in a nice bit of variety that's not seen in the other
levels. What makes Croatoa particularly challenging is that you need to fight
two bosses at the end of the level. The first is The Conquistador, where you
need to focus down his weakpoint and dodge bullets, similar to the prior boss.
Where things get tricky is in his awakened form, where you need to shoot down
floating obstacles to damage his shield.  The catch is that these blocks
provide cover from his attacks, so you're directly putting yourself in harm's
way to progress through the fight. I would've liked to see some more variety in
his attack patterns, but he's still a satisfying boss to fight.

As for the new levels, Phobos is a vastly improved version of Dark Sector. Much
like the former, its visuals shift dramatically in the second half of the
stage, but the mechanics are far more interesting this time. Like in Badlands,
many types of priority threats permeate the level, from ridiculosuly oversized
cannons to anti-tank missile launchers that hate you with a passion. The second
half of the stage extensively tests out your crowd clearing capabilities, as
insects will swarm your current location. The Matriarch is a spectacular
looking, if rather dull boss to fight due to her limited attack variety. 


Finally, we have Deimos, my favorite stage. If the prospect of fighting Martian
crab pirates doesn't excite you, I don't know what will. It's just an awesome
action packed level in general, as there's very little time to breath in
between the cannons, laser barrages, and crab bombers. The pirate queen boss is
also a nice way to close things off, even if she is a bit on the easy side. I
think this is due to a combination of her projectiles being predictably slow
and them coming mostly from in front of her ship.  



CONCLUSION:

Overall, Jamestown Plus is a solid improvement over the original due to how
much new and improved content it has, despite the modular loadout system
feeling half-baked. If you're new to bullet hell shooters or if you haven't
played the original, then this is an excellent introduction to gemre. It's also
great for veterans looking for something new due to how unique its vaunt
mechanics and colonial steampunk aesthetic are.

Thank you all very much for watching. This video was intended to be a quick and
simple review, but you can see how that turned out. I'd like to give Durandal
special thanks, as his encylopediac knowledge of shmups helped me out with a
lot of writer's block. As for upcoming projects, I've been trying to get a
review key for Daemon x Machina on Steam, so we'll see how that turns out. In
the meantime, I'll try to actually make a shorter video, probably on Ubermosh:
Omega, which I think is criminally overlooked. After that, I'll probably be
bunkering down to work on a larger project, either Dying Light or Age of
Empires 3. For channel news, you can follow me on Twitter @SquidTheSid1 or by
join the Squidcord discord server. If you'd like to be absolved of all guilt
from using an adblocker, you can financially support this channel by donating
to my Patreon page or by becoming a YouTube member.  

As always, stay frosty. 

