Jamestown Plus Review

-- show montage of bullet dodging--

Well here we are. After five long years, Jamestown Plus finally makes its way
to PC.  Let's see how this version of the game holds up after nearly a decade
since the original Steam release.

For those of you that are unfamiliar with Bullet Hell shooters, here's a small
collection of gameplay to get you brought up to speed.  --Play DoDonpachi,
Deathsmiles, Mushishihimesama, Blue Revolver--

While individual mechanics and aesthetics greatly differ in these titles, all
good shooters abide by two essential rules.

1). Visual Clarity. 

Can the player track what's happening onscreen at any given moment?  Can they
distinguish what lies in the foreground versus what's in the background? Is it
easy to tell what is and is not an enemy?  Are projectiles distinct from all
other objects, so that they don't blend into their surroundings?

No matter how many bullets are flying across the screen, a well-designed shmup
should always be visually readable by the player. 


2). Precise Player Movement

Given that shooters often require pixel perfect timing to avoid attacks,
accurate player movement is necessary. In general, you should always be able to
predict where your ship will go at any given moment. So systems like
acceleration or ending inertia directly work against this principle.

Although I've noticed some issues with visual clarity, Jamestown otherwise
meets these criteria, while adding in some of its own interesting mechanics.

Where Jamestown sets itself apart from other shooters is in the insane amount
of ship variety. You can choose between 12 vehicles, 3 of which have
customizable specials and firing patterns. While some of the choices are a bit
redundant, I appreciate the amount of strategic options given to the player.  

Let me briefly talk about the combat basics. Every ship has access to a primary
attack, a special, and the vaunt ability. With the exception of the Armada
fleet, each pilot has a fixed firing pattern for their primary. Beam will
shotgun out a spread of projectiles, whereas Gunner shoots out a more
concentrated pillar of them. A pilot's special is usually an alternate attack,
but they can also be provide utility. For example, Ghost creates a doppelganger
that fires bullets. while Gunner can reposition his primary fire's angle. No
pilot shares the same special, resulting in each ship feeling distinct in their
role.

When the player collects enough gold from enemies, they can trigger a vaunt. On
activation, a temporary shield is created around the player, blocking any
incoming projectiles. Additionally, until Vaunt's duration runs out, you'll
gain a 2x score multiplier and deal 50% additional damage.  On top of that,
when Vaunt expires, you'll receive an additional lump score bonus based on how
long it was active. Finally, the player can prematurely end vaunt to create an
emergency projectile shield, at the expense of putting vaunt accumulation on a
cooldown.  

Mastering this ability is key to success in Jamestown. The utility of clearing
out bullets for a short duration cannot be underestimated, as it can easily
allow you to reposition yourself out of the line of fire and save you from
death. Vaunting grants the player several tactical options available at any
given moment. Do you let it quickly expire to spam the defensive aspect of the
ability, or do you draw out its duration to maximize DPS and score?
Additionally, you'll need to decide if you want to prematurely end a vaunt, as
it can save you from fatal damage, at the expense of killing your score combo.
Overall, Vaunt adds in a nice layer of strategic depth to the already chaotic
bullet dodging, while forcing the player to consider the metagame ramifications
of their moment-to-moment decisions. 

Where Jamestown also sets itself apart from other shooters is with its insane
ship variety. You can choose between 12 unique pilots, 3 of which have
customizable specials and firing patterns.  While I appreciate all of this
choice, I do think there are some oversights with their mechanical designs, as
a result.  First, ships with controllable projectiles are far more reliable
than ones without them.  Most notably, the Gunner pilot, which has 360 degree
bullet firing, is the most useful on a regular basis. That's not to say that
the other ships are bad, but I find Gunner's improved positioning to be more
useful than the extra DPS potential from ships with static firing patterns like
Bomber. 

Secondly, I'm not a fan of the modular loadouts introduced with the new Armada
fleet. While the concept is cool and allows you to fine tune an individual
pilot, I find that this system takes away most of their individual identities.
With a choice of two unique specials and six shared firing patterns, these
ships feel rather homogenous. I would've rather had the Armada fleet split up
into six individual pilots, so that each ship feels distinct in its playstyle
similar to the classic and treason ships.

Curiously, there's a lack of a test drive mode for trying out new pilots.
Considering that you'll need to individual unlock most of your fleet in the
in-game store, there's no way to test out a ship and see if you like their
playstyle before you make the commitment. Such a mode would also allow you to
get a basic grasp of their mechanics in a danger-free environment and quickly
swap between ships for practice. As it is, you'll have to load into a level and
wait for the unskippable text to pass before you can try them out, which is
rather annoying.

Speaking of the in-game shop, there is a staggering amount of unlockable
content. From new ships, challenges, and harder difficulty modes, there's a lot
to keep you coming back.  

--talk about each level--


CONCLUSION:

Overall, Jamestown Plus is a great improvement over the original due to how
much new and improved content it has. If you're new to bullet hell shooters or
want a local co-op game to play with friends, then you're in for an excellent,
if somewhat brutal, time. 

DISLIKE (NOTES):

Judgment doesn't explain that vaunt cannot clear out green bullets. Not a fan
of that Game is a bit easy on normal and difficult. Need to bump it up to
Legendary to get some challenge. Might just be me. 

